In this lecture, you'll learn about how to configure a Cisco router to support an external DHCP server.
So you learned in the last lecture, for small branch offices, we'll often configure our Cisco router as
a DHCP server to save buying an external router. But in larger offices where we've got several subnets,
then typically, we'll have an external DHCP server there.
Maybe two of them for redundancy as well.
So, that's what we've got in the example here.
We've got an external DHCP server.
We've got the same topology as the last lecture.
So I've got R1, and our PCs are in the 10.10.10.0 subnet, but we're not going to configure
a DHCP scope on R1 here.
The DHCP requests are going to be served by our DHCP and DNS server, which is at 10.10.20.10.
But we've got a problem here,
so let's see what the problem is.
So, PC2 gets powered on. It doesn't have an IP address yet, so it's configured as a DHCP client.
So it sends out a DHCP request, that is broadcast traffic. It hits the switch and the switch will forward it out
all ports apart from the one it was received on because it's broadcast traffic.
So it will hit PC1,
it's not a DHCP server
so it will silently discard the packet, and it will hit R1
and it's not a DHCP server either.
The problem is the R1 is a router and routers by default do not forward broadcast traffic.
So R1 will not send that DHCP request out on to the 10.10.20.0 subnet, so it will never reach the DHCP server and
PC2 will not get an IP address.
So that's the problem,
snd the fix for this is we need to configure R1 to forward DHCP requests. The way we do this is we configure
it on the interface which will be receiving the DHCP request.
So in our example here, the interface in R1 which is facing the clients is fastEthernet0/1.
So we go to the configuration for the interface fastEthernet0/1 and we say
'ip helper-address 10.10.20.10'.
Now, whenever the router receives a DHCP request on interface, it will forward it to the DHCP server at 10.10.20.10,
and now our clients will be able to get IP addresses.
So, that's how we configure a Cisco router to support an external DHCP server.
Let's have a look at actually configuring this in the lab.
So I'm running this in Packet Tracer
because Packet Tracer supports
a DHCP server. If we have a look at the config on our DHCP server, if I go to the Services tab on here
and choose DHCP, you can see I've configured a DHCP scope for the 10.10.10.0 network. I've specified
the default gateway is at 10.10.10.1, and the DNS server is at 10.10.20.10, and I'm going to
give out addresses in that subnet starting with 10.10.10.100 with a /24 subnet mask.
So, my DHCP server is all set up and configured.
If I have to look at the config on the PC, so I'm going to PC1 here and if I look at the configuration
for its interface, I see that it's configured as a DHCP client.
But if I open up a command prompt on here and do 'ipconfig', you can see that is not getting a valid
IP address.
That is because the DHCP request is not reaching the server.
So to fix this, I need to go onto the router. I'll go into the command line here and I want to go
to global configuration and then its interface
fastEthernet0/1, the interface facing the clients, and I say 'ip helper-address',
let me just expand this out,
so 'ip helper-address' and my DHCP server is at 10.10.20.10. That's it, all that I need to do. If I now go back
onto the PC
and I do an 'ipconfig /renew', then hopefully, it's going to be able to pick up the IP address now,
and you can see, yes, it has. It's been given the first address in the scope, valid address 10.10.10.100.
It's also received its default gateway and its DNS server.
So, that's how you configure a Cisco router to support an external DHCP server.